# Network Security [P6]

> The client is also very concerned about the security of the new network. You need to secure the client's router by performing the following actions:

> * Implement a 'Banner Message of the Day' to deter illegal router access.
> * Ensure a password is required for terminal and console connections. This password should be encrypted.
> * Configure an encrypted password for access to the router itself and to the router configuration mode.

> You need to secure the PC that is connected to the router by installing and configuring anti-virus.

> You should take screenshots of your configuration.

# Importance of Security [M3]

<!-- 800-1200 -->

> Your client would like you to provide a Security Document, explaining:

> * the types of threats faced by organisations
> * the impact that these threats can have on a business
> * how these risks can be minimised

> You should include examples of real life threats and explain the impact these have had on a business.

During a time when breaching security is a thriving business, it's important to take steps to secure servers and public-facing computers, as well as codes of practice and other infrastructure. If systems are not evaluated and weaknesses identified, a network or business can be left vulnerable to attackers.

## Common Threats

There are a number of prominent types of threat commonly fallen victim to by businesses. Targeted attacks may use a combination of these in order to achieve their goal.

## Impact on Business

**Loss of reputation**

## Minimising Risk

# Network Services [P5]

<!-- 1500 -->

> Put together a report, presentation or leaflet which explains the types of services that can be provided by a network.

> Your section on directory services should be very detailed. You should investigate and evaluate the directory services provided by a server operating system, such as Microsoft Windows 2012 Server's Active Directory.

## Communication

## Remote Access

## File Services

## Application Services

## Directory Services [D2]
