> You have been contracted by a car-hire company known as S-Cars.  They are planning to migrate their paper-based bookings system onto an electronic database.  They want your help in getting this system set up, but they would also like you to train up Jhanna (a school-leaver who has recently been hired) to be the main administrator of this database.

> You have decided that Jhanna will need to understand the fundamentals of relational database theory before you start building the database itself and will be putting together a practical guide book outlining the key definitions and methodologies.

> Put together an introductory booklet outlining relational database theory: defining entities, relations, and the benefits of the relational model (**P1**).  Define referential integrity, explaining the role of primary and foreign keys in assuring this (**M1**).  

# Attributes of a Relational Databases [P1]

## Entities

A relational database stores information as records, or rows, in tables. These tables are comprised of a number of columns. A column is typically referred to as a field, and is accompanied by properties which detail its format and use. For example, a table to hold the names, email addresses and unique IDs of registered members of a website could contain four fields; `id`, `email`, `name_last` and `name_first`. These entities would need to each be assigned a type in order to be used to store data. Suggested MySQL data-types to use can be found in the table below.

Field/Entity | Data-Type | Details
-|-|-
`id` | `UNSIGNED INT` | An unsigned four-byte integer could be used, holding a value as high as 4,294,967,295, or 4.3 billion. Although a three-byte `UNSIGNED MEDIUMINT` could be used, this would only be capable of holding 16.8 million users, a user count which many social networks exceed. The hassle of migrating data from one type to another would make the improved efficiency of a two- or three-byte type irrelevant.
`email` | `VARCHAR(64)` | A string as long as 254 characters is used for the address, which would accommodate the longest valid email address.
`name_last` | `VARCHAR(64)` | *See above.*
`name_first` | `VARCHAR(64)` | *See above.*

Once such a table has been populated, it may resemble the following:

`id` | `email` | `name_last` | `name_first`
-|-|-|-
0 | hello@jsmith.io | John | Smith
2 | sayhi@gjon.es | Genny | Jones
3 | wolfgang@wschmidt.de | Wolfgang | Schmidt
... | ... | ... | ...

## The Relational Database Model

# Referential Integrity, Primary Keys, and Relationships [M1]

## Primary Keys

## Foreign Keys

## Referential Integrity

<!-- # Avoiding Errors in Databse Structure [D1] -->

<!-- ## In Design -->

<!-- ## In Reality -->
