## Testing the Data Collection Spreadsheet [P7]

### Plan

In order to ensure that an Excel form works as intended, testing is typically required. So that the testing would be as effective as possible, and would reliably target all aspects of the form, I decided to create a test plan, shown below.

1. To begin, open the form workbook as it would be opened on a computer in the tourist information offices. In order that any users cannot tamper with any of the settings, such as the spreadsheet's password protection, most of the ribbon tabs should be hidden and remainder collapsed:
	1. Open the Excel settings window by clicking *File > Options*.
	2. In the window, click the *Customise Ribbon* button on the left, and then untick the all but the *Home* tab in the box on the right.
	3. Click OK before double clicking the *Home* tab label in the ribbon, which will make it collapse by default.

2. Confirm that Excel has loaded the correct worksheet, and that the tabs for the other two worksheets do not show at the bottom of the window.

3. Ensure than the cell selection is in the first input cell, E8. The date field above should already be filled in with the correct date using the `TODAY()` function.

4. Fill in the form cell by cell. Using the Tab key in the upper left of the keyboard or the Return key, the form can be moved through easily. Because the cells in between the input fields are locked even to selection, Excel should only place the cursor in the fields requiring input; those in column E on rows 8, 10, 12, 14, 16, 18, 20 and 22.

5. When typing a response into one of the form cells, Excel should ideally auto-complete using the lists of data provided by the reference worksheet. The is the case for the *Country of Residence* input cell but not the *Comments* cell, for instance. The auto-completion means that users can enter data that can be efficiently processed by the spreadsheet and used in statistics, while still entering the data in a perhaps more familiar way than the drop-down menu.

6. If incorrect data is entered into the form, such as a country name without a capital letter at the beginning, the spreadsheet should throw an error and display a window to the user informing them to use the drop-down menus available in most of the cells. For some cells, the option to not change the data is presented, accounting for particular cases that may not otherwise be covered by the options given. The *Gender* input cell is among these.

7. When the form is complete and the submit button pressed, there should be a short delay before a window appears confirming that the form's data has been successfully submitted to the database worksheet. If this does not appear, an error has occurred in the execution of the submission macro. This is an issue that must be attended to by a developer or possibly a member of staff, likely with the aid of the [technical documentation](#m4).

### In Practice

I tested the spreadsheet and followed the process outlined above. The only area in which the spreadsheet failed to pass was the auto-completion. I was under the impression that a cell with list-based Data Validation enabled would automatically have auto-completion enabled, but this seems not to be the case. There may be an option in the Data Validation window to enable this feature, otherwise it may simply not be available. Were I to create the form and data submission system again, I would likely research into this in greater detail.

## Spreadsheet Data Formats [P8]

So that the data processed in the original spreadsheet would be available and accessible to as many people and computers as possible, I exported both of the spreadsheets two common formats:

* The first, CSV, is a text-based format, with values separated by commas. Unlike Excel's `*.xlsx` format, CSV files are not specific to any particular software package, meaning both proprietary and free spreadsheet editing software can read the file. That said, the format is very basic, and does not offer as much functionality.

* The second format was HTML and CSS, also both test-based. These use a variety of different syntax elements to express a website in terms of code. This can be read by a web browser such as Google Chrome or Firefox, meaning it has very good compatibility across different operating system platforms. It can also be easily viewed on mobile devices.

<div class="f">
	<a href="/btec/f/42.3-data.csv" class="ref">42.3-data.csv</a>
	<a href="/btec/f/42.3-data.html" class="ref">42.3-data.html</a>
</div>

For instructions about exporting the data from the spreadsheet, please refer to the [User Documentation](#p9).

<!-- gets processed by index.php using file_get_contents() -->
<!--[INCLUDE] markdown/ext/42.3-user-doc.md -->

<div class="n">The User Documentation is also available by itself <a href="/btec/ext/42.3-user-doc" class="ref">here</a>.</div>

<!-- gets processed by index.php using file_get_contents() -->
<!--[INCLUDE] markdown/ext/42.3-tech-doc.md -->

<div class="n">The Technical Documentation is also available by itself <a href="/btec/ext/42.3-tech-doc" class="ref">here</a>.</div>

## Evaluation and User Feedback [D2]

On t' sheet.