<!--[TEMPLATE] timeline -->

* <span>2015</span>Develop my web design and development skills and experiment in new fields of programming. I would like to become better acquainted with PHP and JavaScript, as well as to work more in C and potentially Go. I intend to publish my projects open-source on [GitHub](http://en.wikipedia.org/wiki/GitHub) as some form of evidence of this.

* <span>2016</span>Utilise my skills to build websites for friends and family, and simply to practice. Doing this, I will be able to build a portfolio of past projects and therefore showcase my skillset. By the end of 2016, I would like to have built at least five websites that could realistically be found in production environments.

* <span>2017</span>Work as a formal employee of a company, in an apprenticeship, or as a designer and developer from home. Being able to earn money rather than enter debt with a loan for university will mean that I won't find myself paying money monthly for several years, and losing more to interest. If I was to become self-employed, I would use websites such as Careers 2.0, GitHub and Twitter to find work.

* <span>2018</span>Having worked for around a year-and-a-half in web design and development, I would like to be earning around &pound;18,000 p.a. or more. I feel this is easily achievable if I was to work for a business, but it could be harder being self-employed or free-lance.

* <span>2019</span>Having more experience and having optimised my working environment, I would like to be generating a larger income by this point; perhaps ~&pound;21,000.

* <span>2020</span>*continued*

* <span>2021</span>*continued*

* <span>2022</span>Having dealt with a large number of clients over the years, I would like to have a significant portfolio of websites and web applications that I've built. My intention is to use this portfolio as evidence of my skills, helping me to find more clients. I may also be able to generate a stable, ongoing income by charging to host and manage previous customers' websites.

* <span>2023</span>*continued*

* <span>2024</span>*continued*

* <span>2025</span>By this point, I would like to be working either as a designer and developer at an IT agency or alternatively from home. I would like to be working with a number of clients, and have built a series of websites acting as a portfolio.
