## Network Layouts

A **PAN**, or a personal area network, is used from close range connections between devices. An example of a PAN network would be the Bluetooth connection established between a pair of wireless headphones and a smartphone the unit is pair with. A PAN network generally does not include more than two devices.

A **LAN**, or a local area network, refers to a network of several computers connected typically via a switch. Each of the connected computers are assigned IP addresses either dynamically with DHCP or statically during configuration. The members of a LAN are able to connect to one another, enabling applications such as file sharing, printer sharing and media streaming. The management of a LAN is usually handled by a system administrator, although smaller home networks can often work effectively using only automatically configuration.

A **WLAN** is a LAN using a wireless connection protocol such as IEEE 802.11 ac rather than a wired system such as Ethernet. WLANs have become particularly popular in recent years, commonly known as Wi-Fi, and are often found in homes, business offices and public areas including airport terminals and cafés.

A **MAN**, or a metropolitan area network, is a WAN spread over a particular area, often a city. The term has not seen wide usage, as a MAN is essentially a small WAN and is technologically indifferent. MANs are often referred to by ISPs when working to improve internet connection speeds, as fast and reliable connections between MANs improve consumer broadband speeds.

A **WAN**, or a wide area network, is a network of LANs. In a similar way that a LAN consists of several end-point machines, a WAN consists of several LANs. Each LAN is assigned a global IP address that can be used to access machines on one LAN from another, granted port forwarding has been configured. The largest example of a WAN is the internet. LANs in homes, offices, educational institutions and data centres are all connected in a single WAN, allowing them to all communicate with one another.

**Wireless** networks are those which use no wires, and exist at both small and large scale. For example, the 2G, 3G and 4G mobile communication networks span the majority of the globe, and provide telephone and data services to handsets within a huge area. This is thanks to the fact that a single telephone mast is able to provide coverage over as much as a 50 km-radius area, granted the signal is unobstructed. The standards &ndash; GSM, IMT-2000 and LTE respectively &ndash; dictate how data should be formatted by all compliant infrastructure; both hardware and software. This ensures maximum compatibility across nations and around the world. The protocol definitions for wireless communication are found under the IEEE 802.x series of standards, along with those for PANs and MANs.

## LAN Usage Models

Local area network models can also be sub-categorised into one of the following groups based on their design.

A **peer-to-peer** network, typically only useful at a small scale, involves each networked device being connected physically to a switch or wirelessly to an AP (access point). This allows all of the devices to communicate with one another, and can provide an internet connection if a router is connected to the switch as well. In a P2P (as it is often referred to as) network, each device is equal, and can act as a server to the other devices. For instance, a game server could run on one computer, and three other computers running the game client could connect to the server. This model is useful for small networks that need only offer minimal functionality, and is efficient once configured. However, when more than about eight devices must be networked together, difficulties arise. If users need to be able to use the same credentials to log in on several machines, other devices need to be freely added to and removed from the network, and users want the benefits brought by centralisation, a server is required.

The **client&ndash;server** model, in contrast, has machines dedicated as servers and others as clients; a networked device will either listen for and respond to requests from other devices, or will create those requests based on user actions. Typically a physical server, or a number of them, are used to store files, login credentials and software, and to run applications such as web, mail and source-code management services. This allows, for instance, a user to us the same login credentials on any applicable device without their user profile being set up individually on each client. This is often combined with directory services, which allows users access to specific filesystem directories on the server side regardless of the client machine they're using. The use of a server makes the addition and removal of devices to and from the network much easier, with services like DHCP being used for automatic IP-address assignment becoming feasible. In a client&ndash;server network, clients are still able to act as servers, meaning functionality is not lost. Using this model is simply more efficient, easier to manage and more convenient for end users.
